# PHUSE-SDE-25JUL2024 Conference Presentation
This repository contains the slides for my talk "The Eras of Clinical Data: Fearless Collaboration Between CDM and CDS for a Bejeweled Future" at PHUSE SDE on July 25, 2024 in Radnor, Pennsylvania.

# Abstract
In the era of AI and advanced analytics propelling Clinical Data Management (CDM) forward at an exponential rate, it is important not to lose sight of how crucial the CDM role is. CDMs must have deep cross-functional knowledge in order to translate between clinical, technical, and biometrics areas of expertise to configure systems and triage data issues. It is imperative to the trial success that the data capture systems account for all stakeholders on the study team, as well as sites and subjects, so that users can be trained to easily enter data in a way that promotes patient safety, protocol compliance, and final trial analysis. Clinical Data Scientists (CDS) also have a very particular set of skills across these same areas, though skewed more towards deep technical expertise paired with clinical and statistical subject matter expertise. CDSs are the perfect partner for CDMs to translate user requirements into technical solutions that CDMs can then utilize and train the rest of the study team on to promote automated, data-driven operations. CDSs are well-poised now to understand and apply even more advanced open-source and AI solutions to help CDMs further maximize their full potential. Within Formation Bio’s Biometrics team, we specifically grew the CDM function with the intention to eventually split the team into separate CDM and CDS functions. We’ll share how the specific team members and technical implementation of solutions over the past 3 years supported this structure and how the teams now partner formally during study startup to create fit-for-purpose tools and processes to automate data cleaning, reporting, and analytics. In this roundtable, we’ll facilitate a discussion where CDM and CDS teams across the industry can share examples of specific tools they have implemented to automate CDM workflows, best practices for partnering between these two teams to co-develop technical solutions, and tips for training study teams to promote adoption. We’ll also share perspectives on where AI-driven solutions will fit into the clinical data ecosystem and solicit feedback on the gaps that still exist in fully driving real-time data-driven decision making on clinical trials in the future.
